Ustekinumab-stba (Steqeyma; Celltrion), a biosimilar to ustekinumab (Stelara; Janssen Pharmaceuticals), has been launched in the US and is indicated for the treatment of plaque psoriasis (PsO) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in adult and pediatric patients, as well as Crohn disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) in adults. The launch follows the FDA approval of ustekinumab-stba in December 2024, granted for the same indications as its reference product, ustekinumab.
As a human IL-12 antagonist and IL-23 antagonist, ustekinumab-stba is used to treat various immune-mediated diseases. The drug is administered through subcutaneous injections with 45 mg and 90 mg prefilled syringes, or through intravenous infusions, provided in a 130 mg vial. It is approved for all the same conditions as the reference product, including PsO, PsA, CD, and UC in adults, as well as PsO and PsA in children aged 6 and older.
The FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approval for ustekinumab-stba was based on comprehensive evidence, from a Phase 3 study involving adults with moderate to severe PsO. This study focused on the change in the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) to assess skin symptom improvement. The study's findings showed that ustekinumab-stba and ustekinumab, its reference product, exhibit high similarity and lack clinically significant differences in both safety and efficacy.
With the launch of ustekinumab-stba, the drug is reported to be priced with a wholesale acquisition cost (WAC) list price at an 85% discount to the current WAC list price of ustekinumab. The biosimilar is intended to improve patient access for the indicated treatment.
"The introduction of Steqeyma in the US, as one of the first-wave biosimilars to Stelara, marks an important step in our ongoing efforts to expand patient access to high-quality biologic treatments," Thomas Nusbickel, chief commercial officer at Celltrion USA, said in a news release. "With this launch, we are expanding our immunology portfolio beyond TNF-alpha to include IL-12/23 inhibitors, offering more options for multiple immune-mediated diseases. To further enhance accessibility, Celltrion is actively collaborating with key pharmacy benefit managers to secure broader formulary coverage for Steqeyma."

Johnson & Johnson (NYSE: JNJ) announced today that Health Canada has issued a Notice of Compliance (NOC) for LAZCLUZE™ (lazertinib) in combination with RYBREVANT® (amivantamab) for the first-line treatment of adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 19 deletions or exon 21 L858R substitution mutations. Janssen Inc., a Johnson & Johnson company, is the market authorization holder for LAZCLUZE® and RYBREVANT® in Canada.
With this authorization, LAZCLUZE™ plus RYBREVANT™ becomes the first and only chemotherapy-free combination regimen showing clinically meaningful and statistically significant improvement in progression-free survival versus osimertinib for these patients. RYBREVANT™ is a fully human bispecific antibody targeting EGFR and MET with immune cell-directing activity, and LAZCLUZE™ is a highly potent, brain penetrant, third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI).
"While we have seen much progress in the treatment of lung cancer, many patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC don't reach second-line therapy when initial treatment stops working. This underscores the critical need for better options in the first-line setting," says Dr. Natasha Leighl*, Lung Site Lead, Medical Oncology at the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and Professor of Medicine at the University of Toronto. "The approval of this new targeted combination represents a significant advance in treatment, providing patients with a new option that extends progression-free survival and survival in the first line compared to previously available treatments." 
Lung cancer remains the most commonly diagnosed cancer in Canada and the leading cause of cancer death. NSCLC accounts for 88 per cent of all lung cancers in Canada. Globally, approximately one third of patients with NSCLC harbour an EGFR mutation, 27-38 per cent of whom never receive second-line therapy due to disease progression and limited treatment options. The five-year survival rate for people with advanced EGFR-mutated NSCLC is less than 20 per cent and complex acquired resistance mechanisms after TKI monotherapy make subsequent treatment more difficult.
The Health Canada NOC is based on results from the Phase 3 MARIPOSA study, which showed LAZCLUZE® plus RYBREVANT reduced the risk of disease progression or death by 30 per cent compared with osimertinib (median progression-free survival (PFS) was 23.7 months versus 16.6 months) in the first-line treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with EGFR exon 19 deletions or exon 21 L858R substitution mutations. The median duration of response (DOR) was nine months longer with LAZCLUZE plus RYBREVANT versus osimertinib (25.8 months versus 16.7 months), a secondary endpoint of the study.
"This approval strengthens our commitment to redefining care in areas of high unmet need by advancing innovative regimens that have the potential to extend survival in this deadly disease," says Berkeley Vincent, President, Johnson & Johnson Innovative Medicine, Canada. "Today's Health Canada authorization for LAZCLUZE in combination with RYBREVANT further reinforces the critical role of precision medicine in driving enhanced outcomes for patients living with lung cancer. By offering this targeted first-line treatment, we are continuing our efforts to alter the trajectory of this disease."

Insurance coverage denials have risen in recent years in the US, driven in part by automated algorithms powered by AI – and some recently launched artificial intelligence tools may fight back by generating automatic appeals.
UnitedHealth, Humana and Cigna are facing class-action lawsuits alleging the insurers relied upon algorithms to deny lifesaving care.
One of the lawsuits alleges that Cigna denied more than 300,000 claims in a two-month period, which amounts to about 1.2 seconds for each physician-reviewed claim. Such a practice is aided by algorithms, the lawsuit said.
In 2020, UnitedHealth Group acquired naviHealth and its algorithm for predicting care, called nH Predict, which UnitedHealth uses and also contracts out to other insurers, including Humana. (A spokesperson for UnitedHealth Group denied that the algorithm is used to make coverage decisions; Humana did not respond to a request for comment.)
When it comes to prior authorization, a practice in which doctors and patients must receive an insurance company’s approval before starting care or medications, less than 10% of denied requests in Medicare Advantage plans (Medicare-approved plans from a private company) were appealed in 2022, according to another KFF survey.
But this time, the insurance company denied coverage for the entire visit – nearly $5,000, according to a denial letter reviewed by the Guardian. O’Reilly tried to appeal four times, and each time, the insurer, BlueCross BlueShield of Vermont, gave her a different reason, she said.

The United States has recently been experiencing a significant measles outbreak, which has expanded to 12 states and affected over 220 people as of March 7. Currently, there is one confirmed death and one under investigation.
Recent statistics show that the latest rise in cases has been concentrated around western Texas and New Mexico. Beyond the outbreaks in those two states, measles cases have also been reported in California, New York, and Maryland. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) warned travelers to be vigilant as spring break begins.
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, has said vitamin A, found in supplements such as cod liver oil, as well as the steroid budesonide and the antibiotic clarithromycin have shown “good results” in helping treat measles.
Meanwhile, older children, teens, and adults who are not vaccinated should receive one to two doses of the MMR (Measles, Mumps, Rubella) vaccine, each at least 28 days apart.

Last month, GreenShield — a proudly Canadian-owned and operated non-profit health and benefits company—partnered with Mental Health Research Canada (MHRC) to identify key trends and gaps in care for Canadians amidst growing economic and political uncertainty. The data revealed a significant spike in anxiety over the past month, with the rising cost of living and political tensions with the U.S. reported among the top stressors for Canadians.
Despite growing demand for mental health support, cost and accessibility continue to be major barriers to care – putting therapy further out of reach for those who need it most. As a purpose-driven non-profit and the country’s fastest-growing mental health provider, GreenShield is committed to supporting the mental health of Canadians during challenging times. To help break down these barriers, the company will offer two months of free therapy to Canadians looking to start their mental health journey. The offer includes two sessions with a licensed therapist and an unlimited subscription to digital cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), with no membership or commitment required.
“Time and again, we’ve seen the deep connection between economic uncertainty and declines in mental well-being. As a proudly Canadian and purpose driven company, we’re committed to reducing barriers to care for all Canadians as we collectively navigate this challenging time,” said Zahid Salman, President and CEO of GreenShield. “This is about Canadians helping Canadians. Mental health is not just an individual issue – it’s a national one. Ensuring Canadians have access to support during tough times strengthens the entire country.”
GreenShield’s initiative builds on past lessons from economic downturns, including the 2008 financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic, both of which saw surges in mental health challenges. These moments have reinforced a critical truth that during times of financial uncertainty, access to mental health support is more important than ever, yet too often remains out of reach for those who need it.
As a non-profit, GreenShield operates without short-term profit-driven shareholders, enabling the company to prioritize people and purpose over profits. GreenShield is committed to reinvesting its excess earnings to directly support the health and well-being of underserved communities. Through GreenShield Cares, the company has committed $75 million to improve the health of over one million Canadians by the end of this year, with a focus on mental health, essential medicines, and chronic disease management. By providing Canadians with a risk-free opportunity to try therapy – at no cost – with an inclusive network of therapists, 

Sun Life is pleased to announce a minority investment of $9.5 million in Simpill Health Group Inc., operating as Pillway, with an opportunity to invest up to an additional $1.5 million. Pillway’s online pharmacy expands upon Sun Life’s digital health services and offerings. Sun Life and its health business are committed to helping Canadians navigate, access, receive and integrate care.
“With over 50% of Canadians taking at least one prescription drug a month,† access to medications and pharmacy care is critical. For those caring for their loved ones, helping with medication management and adherence is equally as important,” said Dave Jones, President, Sun Life Health. “As one of the largest private payers of prescription medication in Canada, we know first-hand how important it is that people receive their medication and take it correctly. The team at Pillway has the pharmacy expertise and services to help Canadians, regardless of where they are in their health journey.”
In June 2023, Sun Life launched the Lumino Health™ Pharmacy app, with the technology platform and pharmacy services provided by Pillway. This service was rolled out to Sun Life Group Benefits Clients in Canada. Through the convenience of an app, Pillway’s services include:
• Access to connect with a live pharmacist by chat or a phone call.
• Medications delivered directly in Canada. For many, medicines will arrive the same or next business day.
• Personalized pre-packaging to help you take the right medications at the right time.
• Ability to track usage, manage refills and receive important notifications directly through the app.
“Pillway and Sun Life share a mutual passion for helping Canadians with their health. Today’s announcement is a testament to our ongoing commitment to easy-to-use and high-quality pharmacy care,” said Lak Gill, Chief Executive Officer, Pillway. “We are excited to have Sun Life as a strategic partner, and together, continue to grow.”
This investment is just one of the many ways Sun Life is focusing on the health and well-being of Canadians and working to help bridge the health care gap. It builds on the momentum established by our acquisition of Dialogue, Canada’s premier health and wellness virtual care platform. Sun Life has been offering Dialogue’s services in Canada since March 2020 and Dialogue recently expanded into the U.S.

VUMI® Canada, in partnership with Humania Assurance, is proud to announce that it will be launching a new product for the Canadian market this month.
Prestige VIP is an innovative health insurance plan specifically designed to expand the health care options for Canadians while offering them easy access to world renown doctors and hospitals worldwide.
Outside of Canada, the plan will work without a providers’ network, allowing Canadians to seek treatment with the medical provider of their choice. While in Canada, the plan will complement the Provincial Health Insurance coverage and/or any other employer healthcare plan, allowing them to have more options and the peace of mind of being able to access the best treatment when they need it most.
Prestige VIP is underwritten by Humania Assurance and will be available for individuals, third party administrators (TPA) and corporations. The individual plan will offer deductible options starting at C$250 and a maximum coverage of up to C$5,000,000 per policy year, per person up to the age of 75. For third party administrators (TPAs), the plan will offer coverage up to C$1,000,000, and for corporate groups, coverage that ranges from C$1,000,000 up to C$5,000,000.
Humania Assurance is one the most prestigious and soundest insurance companies in Canada. Founded in 1874, it is a multiple award-winning company that provides insurance coverage to over 200,000 individual and corporate clients.
“The wide range of benefits of this new plan and the VIP service commitment of VUMI® Canada, together with the award-winning expertise of Humania Assurance, make Prestige VIP a must-have for any Canadian,” said David Rendall, CEO of VUMI®.

Unionized workers at one of B.C.’s largest health benefits companies are entering the fourth week of a labour dispute and their own benefits are at the heart of the conflict.
It’s a matter of fairness, according to Pacific Blue Cross CEO Jan Grude, who said the current benefits package offered to employees is more generous than those of their plan members.
CUPE national representative James Richardson acknowledged that the job action has meant longer wait times for some Pacific Blue Cross plan holders. But he said workers are facing the possibility of losing retirement benefits.
But Grude said that Pacific Blue Cross is a private-sector employer, and shouldn’t be held to the standards of a public-sector union contract.
Grude says he hopes the union comes back to the bargaining table, but Richardson says they’re waiting for the offer on the table to change.

Pacific Life has been named one of the 2025 World’s Most Ethical Companies® by the Ethisphere Institute, a global leader in defining and advancing the standards of ethical business practices. Pacific Life was evaluated on its culture of ethics; environmental, social, and governance (ESG) initiatives; ethics and compliance program; and initiatives that support a strong value chain.
This marks the eighth consecutive year Pacific Life has been recognized by the Ethisphere Institute, which honors organizations that demonstrate a commitment to business integrity. Pacific Life was one of 11 insurance or financial service industry honorees.

Aetna members in Massachusetts and Connecticut can now capitalize on InStride Health benefits, a company that gives pediatric anxiety and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) treatment.
More than 90% of commercial members in these states now have access to InStride, a news release states.
“This partnership reinforces our commitment to ensuring more kids, teens and young adults receive the appropriate treatment from providers with specific clinical expertise, and we look forward to expanding to additional markets,” said John Voith, co-founder and CEO of InStride.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts members now have access to Visana Health, a virtual women’s health clinic.
Visana says one in three women have gaps in care, and its specialist team helps women treat conditions including menopause, fibroids, endometriosis and polycystic ovary syndrome.
"It's important that women have access to the services they need to take charge of their own health and well-being," said Monica Ruehli, M.D., Blue Cross' clinical director of reproductive health and gender affirming services, in a statement. "Adding more options like Visana Health ensures we can show up for our members and better support women throughout their health journeys.”
Members will also have access to Verily Onduo, a virtual care option for members with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes. Most members also have access to Virta Health, Teladoc and Omada.
Additionally, the company is launching a pilot program with Curant Health for its Medicare Advantage members to improve outcomes for those with diabetes, hypertension and high cholesterol.
BCBSMA reported a net loss of $224 million for the full year 2024. GLP-1 drug spending totals 20% of all pharmacy spend for the company.

BioInvent International AB ("BioInvent") (Nasdaq Stockholm: BINV) today announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the Investigational New Drug (IND) for the Phase I/IIa clinical study of the immuno-modulatory anti-TNFR2 antibody BI-1808.
"FDA approval of the Phase I/IIa study of BI-1808 is another important milestone for BioInvent as we continue to broaden our exciting pipeline of anti-cancer antibodies. TNFR2 is increasingly attracting interest as revealed by the recent deals in the field. The development of BI-1808 is supported by an impressive set of preclinical data and is one of three BioInvent lead candidates in clinical development," said Martin Welschof, CEO of BioInvent.
The Phase I/IIa study will evaluate the safety, tolerability, and potential signs of efficacy of BI-1808 as a single agent, and in combination with the anti-PD-1 therapy Keytruda® in patients with ovarian cancer, non-small cell lung cancer and CTCL. It is planned to be carried out in the U.S., Denmark, Hungary, the United Kingdom and Russia and is already enrolling patients.
The anti-TNFR2 antibody BI-1808 is a first-in-class drug candidate and is part of BioInvent's tumor-associated regulatory T cells (Treg)-targeting program. This has emerged from the F.I.R.S.T™ platform technology that simultaneously identifies new targets and high-quality antibodies, generating promising new drug candidates to target the tumor microenvironment (TME). TNFR2 is particularly upregulated on Tregs of the TME and has been shown to be important for tumor expansion and survival, representing a new and promising target for cancer immunotherapies.

A vaccine shows promising results in treating the most deadly form of skin cancer, Moderna and Merck announced on Thursday.
Those with severe melanomas who received the vaccine and Merck's cancer drug Keytruda were 49% less likely to die or have their cancer come back after three years than those who were given only Keytruda, the biotech companies said in a news release. 
The findings are based on an ongoing randomized trial involving 157 patients with high-risk stage III/IV melanoma who first had surgery to completely remove cancerous growths. Patients received one milligram of the mRNA vaccine every three weeks for nine doses, and 200 milligrams of Keytruda every three weeks for about a year versus Keytruda alone for approximately a year.  
The companies have begun Phase 3 trials of mRNA-4157 with Keytruda for people with stage III and IV melanoma. The Food and Drug Administration earlier this year designated the treatment as a breakthrough therapy in order to expedite the development and review of drugs meant to treat life-threatening diseases.
"We look forward to sharing these data with people impacted by the disease and the broader scientific community," Kyle Holen, M.D., Moderna's senior vice president and head of development, therapeutics and oncology, stated.

Liminal BioSciences Inc. ("Liminal BioSciences" or the "Company") is pleased to announce that the transaction contemplated by the previously announced statutory plan of arrangement under the provisions of the Canada Business Corporations Act involving the Corporation and Structured Alpha LP ("SALP"), a limited partnership managed by its general partner, Thomvest Asset Management Ltd., was completed earlier today (the "Arrangement"). Pursuant to the Arrangement, SALP acquired all of the issued and outstanding common shares of Liminal BioSciences (the "Shares") not currently owned by SALP or its affiliates and associates (the "Minority Shares") at a price of US$8.50 per Share, payable in cash (the "Consideration").
Registered holders of Minority Shares ("Minority Shareholders") are reminded that in order to receive any Consideration that they are entitled to, they must properly complete, sign and return the letter of transmittal to Computershare Investor Services Inc., as depositary, together with the share certificate(s) and/or Direct Registration System (DRS) Advice(s) representing Shares formerly held by them. Minority Shareholders who hold their Shares through a broker, investment dealer or other intermediary should carefully follow the instructions provided by such broker, investment dealer or other intermediary.
As a result of the Arrangement, the Shares will no longer be listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market. In addition, the Company will submit an application to cease to be a reporting issuer under applicable Canadian securities law, will file a certification and notice on Form 15 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission to suspend its reporting obligations under U.S. securities laws and will otherwise terminate the Company's public reporting requirements.

Merck (MRK.N), opens new tab has signed a licensing agreement for a heart disease drug with Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals (600276.SS), opens new tab worth up to $2 billion, the latest in a series of deals U.S. drugmakers have recently signed with China-based firms.
Large drugmakers including Merck and Eli Lilly (LLY.N), opens new tab have turned to Chinese biotechs for deals that give them access to new drugs for a cheaper investment, analysts have said.
Most recently, Danish drugmaker Novo Nordisk (NOVOb.CO), opens new tab bought global rights to China-based United Laboratories International's (3933.HK), opens new tab weight-loss drug candidate in a deal worth up to $2 billion.
Merck (MRK.N), opens new tab last year signed a licensing deal worth up to $2 billion for Chinese biotech Hansoh Pharma's (3692.HK), opens new tab experimental oral drug to treat obesity. It also bought the rights to an early-stage cancer drug from China's LaNova in an up to $3.3 billion deal.
China continues to be an interesting source of recently struck licensing deals, as more innovations at low costs are coming out of the region, said Kevin Gade, chief operating officer at Bahl & Gaynor, which owns Merck shares.
Under the latest deal, announced on Tuesday, Merck will get exclusive rights to develop, manufacture and sell Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals' experimental oral heart disease drug, HRS-5346, worldwide, except in the Greater China region.
The drug, currently being studied in a mid-stage trial in China, belongs to a class of drugs which prevent formation of cholesterol, fats and proteins in the blood, which can limit the blood flow to vital organs resulting in heart attack, stroke and other cardiovascular diseases.
Hengrui Pharma will receive an upfront payment of $200 million and will be eligible for up to $1.77 billion if it meets certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones, as well as royalties on net sales of HRS-5346, if approved.

Novo Nordisk has bought into the “triple G” idea, gaining a GLP-1/GIP/glucagon triple agonist from China’s United Laboratories for up to $2 billion. The candidate, coded UBT251, would be a direct competitor to Eli Lilly’s retatrutide. In a phase 1b trial, weekly UBT251 at the highest subcutaneous dose of 6 mg led to an average 15.1% weight loss from baseline after 12 weeks

In another China deal potentially worth up to $2 billion, Merck & Co. is paying $200 million upfront for a phase 2 lipoprotein(a) inhibitor from Hengrui Pharma. Elevated Lp(a) in the blood, as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, has become an increasingly popular target. Lilly has a clinical candidate called muvalaplin, and AstraZeneca last year licensed a preclinical one from China’s CSPC Pharma.

In a piece of bad news for Hengrui, the FDA has once again rejected its Elevar Therapeutics-partnered combination of the PD-1 inhibitor camrelizumab and VEGFR inhibitor rivoceranib. Like the first rejection last year, the FDA this time also raised problems with Hengrui’s camrelizumab manufacturing facility in China.

AbbVie has sued Genmab over the Danish company’s $1.8 billion acquisition of Sino-American biotech ProfoundBio last year. The Illinois pharma alleged that Genmab was “intentionally and willfully blind” to Profound’s alleged theft of its antibody-drug conjugate trade secrets. Genmab said it “categorically refutes allegations and will vigorously defend the company.”

Johnson & Johnson’s Rybrevant and its Yuhan-partnered Lazcluze significantly reduced the risk of death by 25% versus AstraZeneca’s Tagrisso in first-line EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer, according to a high-stakes readout from the phase 3 Mariposa trial. J&J believes the overall survival win sets the combo up to be the new standard of care. But the high-maintenance nature of the regimen poses a challenge.

The FDA has taken issue with Taiho Oncology’s doctor-facing web page for the cholangiocarcinoma drug Lytgobi. The agency raised concerns that some descriptions of the drug’s overall survival and progression-free survival data from a single-arm phase 2 study were misleading. The agency is giving the firm 15 working days to submit a written response.

Medical Marijuana, Inc. (OTC: MJNA) (the "Company"), announced today that Kannalife Sciences, Inc. (Kannalife"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company's portfolio investment company Neuropathix, Inc., a pioneering biotech company specializing in the development of small molecule synthetic cannabinoid therapeutics targeting inflammation, was awarded grant funding of $1.49 million for its Parkinson's research using its Cannabinoid Therapeutic KLS-13019. The Company owns approximately 22% of Neuropathix.
Medical Marijuana, Inc. Chairman and CEO, Tim Scott, commented on the news; "We are one of Neuropathix's largest shareholders and the securing of this grant to its wholly-owned subsidiary Kannalife is a very welcome development. We believe that Kannalife's proprietary cannabinoid therapeutic KLS-13019 has the potential to show efficacy in preclinical studies and subsequently move into more meaningful clinical trials to be tested as an effective treatment for Parkinson's Disease. If such potential for KLS-13019 were to be realized, we believe it would have a significant impact on the value of the Company's investment portfolio given its large ownership stake in Kannalife's parent company, Neuropathix. Accordingly, we're very excited that the grant funding will provide Kannalife with the ability to conduct Parkinson's research using KLS-13019."

Oncolytics Biotech® Inc. (NASDAQ: ONCY) (TSX: ONC), a leading clinical-stage company specializing in immunotherapy for oncology, today reported on highlights and financial results for Q4 and year-end 2024. With its lead candidate, pelareorep, demonstrating strong efficacy signals in breast, pancreatic, and anal cancer, the company is strategically advancing toward registrational studies that could redefine treatment landscapes in multiple high-need indications. All dollar amounts are expressed in Canadian currency unless otherwise noted.
"With multiple clinical trials surpassing expectations in 2024, 2025 is shaping up to be a defining year for Oncolytics. Our top priority is HR+/HER2- metastatic breast cancer, in which two randomized trials involving over 100 patients have shown substantial clinical benefit for patients receiving pelareorep and paclitaxel compared to paclitaxel monotherapy," said Wayne Pisano, Chair of Oncolytics' Board of Directors and Interim CEO. "We believe that if we can approximate the benefit we saw in BRACELET-1 in our planned registrational study, the progression-free survival benefit alone would support an accelerated approval submission. When adding pancreatic and anal carcinoma to the list of addressable indications where we have generated compelling efficacy signals, pelareorep could have a meaningful impact for a multitude of patients and generate value for our shareholders."

Oncolytics Biotech is seeking accelerated approval for its lead cancer therapy, pelareorep, with plans to start a registrational Phase II breast cancer trial.
The US-based company noted that its decision to seek accelerated approval is based on the positive data from the Phase II BRACELET-1 trial (NCT04215146) and feedback Oncolytics received from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The registrational Phase II trial is expected to start in 2025 and will evaluate the combination treatment of pelareorep and chemotherapy, paclitaxel.
The news was received well by Oncolytics’ investors, as the company’s stock was up by 18.22% at the market close on 4 October, compared to the market close on the previous day. Oncolytics’ stock is continuing its upward swing and is up by 8.18% in premarket trading today (7 October). The company’s market cap currently stands at $84.5m.
Oncolytic virus therapies have struggled to find a sure footing in the cancer immunotherapy landscape, which is dominated by checkpoint inhibitors like Merck & Co’s Keytruda (pembrolizumab). GlobalData expects sales of oncolytic virus therapies to increase by up to 20 times from $114m in 2023 to $2.4bn by 2029.
GlobalData is the parent company of Pharmaceutical Technology.
The planned registrational Phase II trial is expected to enrol 180 patients with hormone receptor-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HR+/HER2-) advanced/metastatic breast cancer. The study evaluates the combination therapy in patients who have either progressed on antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs), who are not eligible for ADCs, or who cannot tolerate ADCs.
Trial recruitment is expected to start in the first half of 2025. Oncolytics noted that the study should be sufficiently powered to show statistical significance with a progression-free survival (PFS) benefit of at least 4.3 months.
The median overall survival (OS) was not reached in the Phase II BRACELET-1 study. However, the company ”conservatively” estimates the median OS for the pelareorep arm to be 32.1 months, compared to the 18.2 months median OS seen in the paclitaxel control arm. The final PFS of the pelareorep treatment arm was 12.1 months, compared to 6.4 months for the chemotherapy-only arm.
“Our first randomised study in breast cancer, IND-213, demonstrated the ability of pelareorep combination therapy to improve survival in heavily pre-treated patients with advanced or metastatic HR+/HER2- disease,” said Oncolytics’ chief medical officer, Dr. Thomas Heineman.
“The subsequent randomised BRACELET-1 study showed that pelareorep combination therapy could improve outcomes in HR+/HER2- breast cancer patients who had received prior CDK4/6 inhibitors. Based on the success of these studies, we are now ready to pursue a large Phase II study powered to support accelerated approval in the setting of ADC therapies such as AstraZeneca and Daiichi Sankyo’s Enhertu (fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki),” Heineman added.
"Oncolytics targets accelerated approval for oncolytic virus therapy" was originally created and published by Pharmaceutical Technology, a GlobalData owned brand.

Daewoong Pharmaceutical announced on March 28 that it will introduce three new cancer drug candidates at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR 2025), which will be held in Chicago, the United States, from April 25 to 30. The cancer drug candidates include the targeted anticancer drug "DWP216," the immuno-oncology drug "DWP217," and the synthetic lethality anticancer drug "DWP223." All will be revealed for the first time at this conference.
DWP216 is a targeted anticancer drug aimed at mutated cancer types. When a mutation occurs in the tumor suppressor gene "NF2," it activates "TEAD," which induces the expression of cancer-related genes. In the absence of targeted therapies for NF2-mutant cancers, DWP216 is expected to pioneer new treatment options.
DWP217 is an immuno-oncology drug that improves the immune-suppressive environment by inhibiting the enzyme arginase, which suppresses immunity. Currently, widely used PD-1 targeted immuno-oncology drugs do not directly attack cancer cells, but instead guide immune cells to recognize and attack cancer. However, the complex biological environment surrounding cancer cells, known as the tumor microenvironment (TME), often hinders these immune responses from achieving their full potential. DWP217 helps immune cells more aggressively attack cancer cells by blocking the action of arginase, which reduces immune cell activity.
DWP223 is a synthetic lethality anticancer drug that works by blocking DNA repair in cancer cells. It can be used in cases where resistance has developed to existing anticancer drugs used for cancers with "BRCA1/2" mutations, such as breast and ovarian cancers.
Park Sung-soo, CEO of Daewoong Pharmaceutical, stated, "This is a meaningful achievement that demonstrates the potential for cancer drug development based on Daewoong's experience and research capabilities in new drug development," and added, "Following our efforts in autoimmune and fibrosis fields, we will accelerate the development of global innovative new drugs in the oncology field as well."

After rising to prominence during the COVID-19 pandemic, South African drugmaker Aspen Pharmacare has landed in the FDA's crosshairs thanks to a recent inspection that uncovered problems at one of the company's production plants. 
Aspen, the largest drugmaker on the African continent, was slammed last month in a warning letter by the FDA citing sterility issues that could lead to microbial contamination. The FDA posted the document on its website Tuesday.
The rebuke follows a Sept. 9-17 inspection of the company's manufacturing site in Gqeberha, South Africa. In assessing the site's conditions, the agency concluded the company failed to adopt scientifically sound laboratory controls needed to meet regulatory standards. The plant that was under review specifically produces eye drops and other sterile medicines. 
The warning letter was issued to Aspen on Feb. 24. Earlier in the month of February, the agency placed certain Aspen products on its Import Alert list, according to the document.
Digging deeper into Aspen's manufacturing infractions, the company failed to perform impurity testing prior to the release of an unspecified product, according to the FDA. Further, the company didn’t establish scientifically justified specifications to monitor impurities during stability testing of products containing two particular active pharmaceutical ingredients used in eye drops, the FDA said in its letter. 
During the inspection, the FDA also observed operators using their gloved hands rather than appropriate sterile tools to remove jammed bottles from a product line. Workers were also seen blocking airflow from a HEPA filter by placing their hands directly over open sterilized bottles without removing them from the aseptic filling line.
These issues were not isolated problems, as the company told the FDA that it identified contamination in two media fill batches produced on a pair of aseptic filling lines at the facility back in 2022. 
“You identified the root cause as poor aseptic behavior,” the agency said in its letter. “These contamination events along with the poor aseptic practices observed during our inspection indicate your aseptic manufacturing operations may lack adequate control.”
FDA inspectors also noted that a large door leading to the outside was left open on “numerous occasions” for ventilation purposes. This practice could expose empty sterile containers to exterior conditions, the FDA said. 
Aspen was additionally cited for not having appropriate controls over computer or related systems to ensure that only authorized personnel can make changes in master production and control records. The FDA said Aspen also failed to institute an adequate system for monitoring environmental conditions in aseptic processing areas at its plant. 
Aspen has subsequently suspended production of all drugs for the U.S. market.
Aspen hit the international scene during the COVID-19 pandemic when it secured a license to distribute, price and brand Johnson & Johnson’s COVID-19 shot in Africa. However, the deal eventually soured due to a lack of demand for the vaccine.
Undaunted, the company in late 2023 expanded its global footprint with a $100.3 million agreement to buy Sandoz’s China operations, which came shortly after Sandoz was spun off by its parent Novartis. 
Aspen was also tapped by Novo Nordisk in 2023 to help produce human insulin for Africa, using—in part—some of the sterile infrastructure the company previously established to make COVID vaccines. 

Takeda Pharmaceutical has announced that its subcutaneous (SC) Entyvio (vedolizumab) has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a maintenance therapy for adults with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease (CD), following therapy with intravenous (IV) Entyvio.
The approval was based on results from the phase 3 VISIBLE 2 study.
Causing the digestive tract to become swollen and irritated, CD is a form of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which affects around ten million people worldwide, according to the European Federation of Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Associations.
The randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the safety and efficacy of SC Entyvio™ as a maintenance therapy in 409 adult patients with moderately to severely active CD who have experienced an inadequate response to, loss of response to, or intolerance to at least one of the following: corticosteroids, immunomodulators or tumour necrosis factor blockers.
Entyvio is a biologic therapy that is designed to specifically target the alpha4beta7 integrin to limit the ability of certain white blood cells to infiltrate tissues in the gut.
After injecting Entyvio SC or placebo every two weeks, 48% of patients receiving the maintenance therapy achieved long-term clinical remission compared to 34% of patients who received placebo.
Additionally, the safety profile of Entyvio® SC was generally consistent with the safety profile of Entyvio IV.
Brandon Monk, senior vice president, head, US gastroenterology business unit, Takeda, commented: “The approval of subcutaneous Entyvio in CD delivers on our goal of providing treatment options that can help patients achieve remission of their ulcerative colitis or CD, while also providing them flexibility and choice of route of administration.”
Entyvio™ SC has already been approved in more than 50 countries, while Entyvio® IV has been granted approval in over 70 countries, both including the US and EU.
Most recently, Entyvio SC was approved by the FDA in September 2023 for the maintenance treatment of adults with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis, a form of IBD, which is available in the US as a single-dose prefilled pen.

Millions of Americans suffering from anxiety and insomnia are prescribed a class of sedatives known as benzodiazepines.
Known under the popular trade names Xanax, Valium and Ativan, these medications have been widely prescribed beginning in the 1970s. However, long-term treatment with these medications have also been associated with serious clinical risks, including falls, respiratory problems, cognitive impairments and harmful interactions with other medications.
Many physicians are now appropriately working with patients to taper these medications, but the tapers themselves often create a new set of problems: Severe physical withdrawal symptoms such as tremors and high blood pressure; dangerous psychiatric conditions such as depression and suicidal thoughts; and the recurrence of the underlying conditions of anxiety and insomnia that the medication was originally intended to treat. The underlying conditions often return much worse than before.
Now, a group of physician-scientists at Oregon Health & Science University and the VA Portland Health Care System have coined a new term for this phenomenon: Complex persistent benzodiazepine dependence, or CPBD.
“This is really a dangerous situation,” said Christopher K. Blazes, M.D., assistant professor of psychiatry in the OHSU School of medicine and the director of OHSU’s addiction psychiatry fellowship. “We now know that long-term benzodiazepine prescribing is rarely indicated, but we are still left with the problem of helping those who have been on these medications for years to safely get off them. The process of discontinuation can be very challenging and even dangerous. There may even be some circumstances, when attempts to discontinue fail, that restarting safe doses may be indicated.”
Blazes and co-authors Linda Peng, M.D., assistant professor of medicine (general internal medicine and geriatrics) in the OHSU School of Medicine, and Thomas W. Meeks, M.D., assistant professor of psychiatry in the OHSU School of Medicine and the Portland VA, published a viewpoint in the journal JAMA Psychiatry establishing and clinically defining CPBD.
Prevalence of the condition will become clear as health care providers begin to recognize it in clinical practice, Blazes said.
“The opioid crisis has dominated headlines, yet benzodiazepines are an underrecognized and important contributor to the public health crisis of drug overdose deaths,” the authors write.
All patients who take benzodiazepines long term will develop physiologic dependence to the medications, which means they develop tolerance requiring escalating doses, and will experience withdrawal symptoms when they stop taking the drugs.
But dependence is different than addiction — the distinction identified by the new term, CPBD. Most of these patients don’t have addictions that result in sacrificing jobs, relationships or personal stability. Instead, CPBD defines a form of physiological dependence to benzodiazepines that sometimes includes behaviors consistent with addiction, but that only develop during the discontinuation process.
The distinction is important because treatment for addiction differs from treatment of dependence, Blazes said.
“You don’t want to diagnose addiction if people don’t have addiction,” he said. “People who don’t have addictions aren’t going to respond as well to psychological-social and behavioral interventions that work for addiction.”
Because benzodiazepines are associated with a large uptick in mortality, Blazes said he works with patients to taper off these medications. At the same time, he recognizes that many patients who have been prescribed benzodiazepines over months and even years will experience severe repercussions from de-prescribing.     
“It’s a conundrum,” Blazes said. “You’re damned if you do and damned if you don’t.”

Only a year ago, as hype was building around the semaglutide drugs Ozempic and Wegovy, conversations revolved around their potential to “end obesity” by helping people drop large amounts of weight.
Then there was talk of how semaglutide’s appeal for weight loss was causing shortages for people who needed it to treat their diabetes, as well as which celebrities might have been getting their hands on it. Despite the buzz, these treatments were still somewhat exotic.
Today, there is no longer talk of shortages. In fact, it is easier than ever to obtain these medications from online pharmacies, provided you have the funds and the right BMI. At lightning speed, the jabs have become household names. You or someone you know may well be taking one.
Some data indicates that as many as 1 in 8 people in the US have tried one of the new generation of weight-loss drugs; in Britain, around 1 in 7 people have taken one or have a family member or friend who has done so. It is fair to say we are living in the era of Ozempic, and it is changing much more than our collective waistlines.
In this special report, we take a clear-eyed look at the new normal and the questions it raises. What do these treatments mean for traditional approaches to weight loss, in particular exercise (see “Why exercise is more important than ever when taking weight-loss drugs”), and will those on the drugs really need to keep taking them for life (see “GLP-1 drugs are only the start – the powerful drugs to expect next”)? Over the past year, we have seen study after study examine their benefits for other conditions, including Alzheimer’s disease, depression and addiction. So how do they influence the brain beyond appetite regulation (see “What do GLP-1 drugs really tell us about the brain’s reward system?”)?
Many people are experimenting with taking them in smaller doses, but is this a good idea (see “Microdosing GLP-1 drugs is on the rise – but does it work?”)? And we also ask what all of this means for society as a whole (see “The unexpected impacts of a society transformed by weight-loss drugs”) and what comes next (see “GLP-1 drugs are only the start – the powerful drugs to expect next”).
What’s clear is that the new boom in weight-loss drugs is just the beginning. In another year’s time, things are likely to look very different once again.

The prescription drug pregabalin has been linked to a number of deaths in the UK and around the world.
Many users buy the drug illegally on the black market, often from unregulated websites.
Pregabalin is used to treat conditions including epilepsy, nerve pain and anxiety on the NHS.
It comes as tablets, capsules or in liquid form, and may be called Alzain, Axalid or Lyrica, depending on the brand.
More than eight million pregabalin prescriptions were dispensed in England in 2022.
Prescription rates are showing signs of levelling off across the UK, but doctors say it can be a very useful treatment for patients when taken correctly, and should remain available.
Some call pregabalin the new Valium or "Bud" (as in Budweiser beer) because it can make users feel relaxed, in a similar way to tranquilisers or alcohol.
Taking too much of it - particularly when combined with other street drugs that also have a sedative effect - can cause drowsiness and breathing problems.
Patients who are prescribed pregabalin are advised to avoid alcohol.
Records in England suggest most deaths between 2004 and 2020 involving pregabalin happened when it was taken alongside another medicine such as methadone or morphine.
In many cases, the drugs had not been prescribed.
Taken together, opiates and pregabalin slow down breathing. An emergency antidote called naloxone that works against opiates does nothing to counteract pregabalin's effects.
The 2022 data for England and Wales lists 441 deaths related to pregabalin.
There have also been a significant number of deaths in Northern Ireland.
According to the latest data from the NI Statistics and Research Agency (Nisra), 71 of the 213 drug-related deaths recorded in 2021 mentioned pregabalin on the death certificate.
That compares to one death in 2013, nine in 2016, rising to 77 in 2019 before falling back.
The number of deaths linked to pregabalin and the similar drug gabapentin in Scotland peaked in 2020, at 502. This dropped to 472 in 2021, and 367 in 2022.
Pregabalin's calming effect - sometimes described as a "gentle high" - can mean some users underestimate the drug's addictive nature over time.
Dependence on pregabalin is especially dangerous for those with a prior history of drug abuse or addiction.
Some people find it hard to stop taking pregabalin.
Withdrawal symptoms can include mood changes such as anger and irritability, anxiety and panic as well as physical symptoms like sweating, nausea and chills.
Anyone trying to come off the drug should seek health advice first.
You should not suddenly stop taking pregabalin unless advised by your doctor. The dose is usually reduced over a week or longer.
The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 divides drugs into three categories, class A, B and C, according to the harm they cause when misused.
Pregabalin was made a class C drug in 2019. That means it is illegal to possess pregabalin without a valid prescription, or to supply it to others.
Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) statistics show pregabalin is the fourth most commonly seized drug behind cannabis, cocaine and benzodiazepines.
Between July 2021 and June 2022, pregabalin was seized by officers on 804 occasions.
In the following twelve months, that figure rose to 1,081 - an increase of more than 34%.
Since being introduced in the US and UK in 1993, pregabalin has spread across the world.
A study published by the medical journal Nature Communications estimates that the number of doses of pregabalin and gabapentin taken daily around the world rose more than fourfold between 2008 and 2018.
There has also been a global increase in pregabalin abuse and deaths.
Australia's 2023 Annual Overdose Report highlighted 887 deaths linked to pregabalin and gabapentin between 2000 and 2021 - 93% involving pregabalin.
Official reports suggest pregabalin is also being increasingly abused in Saudi Arabia and Jordan.
In 2017, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) National Rehabilitation Centre said pregabalin and gabapentin were the most commonly abused drugs by under-30s.
Large quantities of illegally-traded pregabalin have been captured in the UAE and Kuwait.
In March, almost three million pills were seized in the UAE. In 2023, Kuwaiti authorities recovered 15 million pregabalin capsules and half a tonne of the drug in powder form.

Lyrica, a drug manufactured by Pfizer, was initially developed to treat epilepsy. Since that time, it’s been prescribed off-label to treat chronic pain and anxiety — often with disastrous results.
High-profile cases of the drug’s devastating effects have emerged in Australia, where use of the drug has skyrocketed of late; the number of Lyrica prescriptions filled in the country went from 36,000 in 2012 to 4,000,000 in 2018, an increase of over 10,000%.
A correspondingly high human toll is being paid as the drug predominates; Christalla Andreadis, a 52-year-old prescribed Lyrica after a car accident, declared the drug “gets its claws into your soul” while describing the devastating and addictive nature of Lyrica (the generic name for which is Pregabalin).
In addition to suicidal thoughts, use of Lyrica has been associated with respiratory depression; slowed breathing can be dangerous on its own, and the chance of fatality only increases when the user is elderly, has a pre-existing lung condition, or uses opioids in combination with Lyrica.
Other side effects have been reported; one mother described her daughter’s descent into Lyrica addiction, characterizing her as a once effervescent young woman who began to lose both her spark and control of her behavior — often falling asleep while standing up and acting in other erratic ways — before tragically dying of an overdose in 2020.
And Lyrica isn’t just creating problems in Australia. Gabapentinoids (a class of drugs of which Lyrica is a member) are incredibly common in the US; Lyrica itself cost Medicare $2.1 billion in 2016, as more than 850,000 Medicare beneficiaries were prescribed the drug in that year alone.
When asked by reporters about the dangers of Lyrica, manufacturer Pfizer punted; the pharmaceutical giant denied ownership of the drug — despite their branding being plainly visible on Lyrica’s packaging — and passed the buck to Viatris, a company Pfizer created in 2020.
There’s now a growing curiosity about what exactly Pfizer knew about the destructive and addictive potential of Lyrica while they were spending millions to market the drug to doctors and to an unsuspecting public; perhaps unsurprisingly, it’s not the first time Pfizer has found themselves in hot water because of Lyrica.
The US Department of Justice fined Pfizer $2.3 billion for breaking the law in how it promoted 4 of its drugs, including Lyrica, in 2009. At the time, the settlement was the largest health care fraud payout in history. To date, it’s the second largest.
Pfizer faced allegations of paying kickbacks to doctors for prescribing their drugs, making false claims about Pfizer drugs, and promoting off-label use of drugs like Lyrica; it’s illegal for drug companies like Pfizer to promote use of their drugs for reasons not approved by the FDA.
A similarly aggressive and unscrupulous marketing strategy was used in Australia; Pfizer pumped millions into “educational” events for doctors (where drug companies often get to bend the laws around courting medical professionals to their breaking point, shamelessly “wining and dining” care providers in an attempt to get their proprietary medications into as many prescription pads as possible).
Some elected officials have tried to force Pfizer to answer for their behavior when it comes to Lyrica; Senator Ron Wyden, the current chair and then-ranking member of the Senate Finance Committee, wrote then-Pfizer CEO Ian Read in 2018 to ask Read why Pfizer had hiked the price of Lyrica multiple times, sometimes by as much as 145%, to the detriment of taxpayers who are prescribed the medication.
Read, for his part, had previously insisted that companies like Pfizer don’t make too much money. Pfizer had well over $41 billion in revenue last year and is expecting $26 billion just from COVID-19 vaccine sales alone in 2021.
If the above reports aren’t bad enough, Buzzfeed News reported in 2017 that Lyrica was “the drug of choice to treat rampant depression, anxiety, and PTSD” in a Greek refugee camp. That Lyrica was (and possibly still is) distributed so widely to refugees may help explain the enormously high rate of suicidal ideation among the demographic; The Washington Post reported the results of a survey that found 41% of a certain subset of refugees have contemplated suicide, and suicidal thoughts are a possible side effect of Lyrica. Other factors most certainly contribute to this troubling statistic — it’s a near certainty that Lyrica use isn’t helping, however.
One observer of Lyrica use within the refugee camp told a reporter that “Life here is hard. Some people take the pill,” going on to say that refugees “do not take [Lyrica] as medicine … they take it like drugs.”
Many people across the world, both Americans and Australians, are doing the same. Only time will tell if public outcry over the actions of companies like Pfizer and the harmful overprescription of drugs like Lyrica will be enough to motivate the elected officials who have failed to rein in drug companies, or the drug companies themselves, who often flood Congress and candidates with donations, to change their ways.

Many of the prescription drugs that are commonly abused or misused are brands most people have heard of. Painkillers, also known as opioids, are the most frequently abused ones, per data from the New York State Department of Health. These include morphine, codeine, oxycodone and hydrocodone, with brand names OxyContin, Vicodin and Lortab. Depressants that are used to treat anxiety and sleep disorders include brands like Valium and Xanax and are also commonly abused. Ditto for stimulants that treat ADHD such as Ritalin, Dexedrine and Adderall. 
Dr. Holly Geyer, an addiction medicine specialist and the lead physician of the Mayo Clinic opioid stewardship program in Arizona, explains that in an effort to help combat opioid-related drug abuse, many doctors have been turning to a class of drugs that isn't classified as a controlled substance: gabapentinoids. This has contributed to a drug called gabapentin becoming the sixth-most prescribed medication in the United States. 
As a result of this, and somewhat ironically, "we are now seeing emerging patterns of abuse with gabapentin across the country," Geyer says, adding that such abuse can occur with gabapentin alone, "or in combination with other drugs of abuse, such as opioids."
Here's who gabapentin was originally approved for, what it's used for today and why it's becoming a drug of increasing concern for abuse and misuse. 
Gabapentin is a prescription medication that was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1993 as a treatment for epilepsy. It works by binding to a type of calcium channel in nerve cells, "which is thought to modify how the nerve functions," explains Dr. Tom Lombardi, medical director of neurosciences for Intermountain Health in Salt Lake City.
In this capacity, the drug can help control specific types of nerve pain and treat seizure disorders, "as it acts on the nervous system to help reduce nerve transmission," says Geyer.
It's typically administered as an oral medication, is usually taken two to three times daily by mouth and is available in pill or liquid form, says Andrea Tedeschi, a neuroscientist at The Ohio State University College of Medicine and co-author of gabapentin-related research. It's available "as both a brand name product and a lower-cost generic," he says. Brand names include Neurontin and Gralise. 
While gabapentin can be helpful in a number of circumstances, some of the common side effects associated with taking the drug as directed include drowsiness, dizziness, headache, dry mouth, weight gain, swelling of the hands, feet or ankles, back or joint pain and flu-like symptoms such as nausea, fever and body aches, per Harvard Medical School.
Rare but serious side effects include rash, itching, yellowing of the skin, swelling of the face and throat, problems speaking, difficulty swallowing and changes in memory, personality or ability to concentrate.
When used as directed, gabapentin is known to have numerous uses and benefits. It has been FDA-approved to help control and treat seizures and to diminish a specific type of nerve pain called post-herpetic neuralgia that often follows a shingles' diagnosis. 
In addition to these FDA-approved uses, Tedeschi says gabapentin is also sometimes prescribed off-label by providers for a variety of other medical conditions. (Off-label use means evidence exists that a drug is helpful in treating conditions other than those for which it has been FDA approved.)
Known off-label uses where doctors prescribe gabapentin include as a treatment for hot flashes, restless leg syndrome, mood disorders, anxiety, and to diminish nerve pain related to diabetes or the neck and back pain associated with conditions such as sciatica.
Among the reasons it's so popular are that "it's a generic medication, so it is relatively inexpensive," says Lombardi. It also offers "excellent pain control for many medical conditions driven by damaged nerves," says Geyer. 
Despite its FDA approval and proven benefits, gabapentin is often misused. Though not considered addictive, "in some patients, the drug can cause a ‘high,’ which increases its abuse potential," notes Geyer. 
It's also known to enhance the psychological effect of opioids, says Tedeschi, and can thereby contribute to their continued abuse – even to the point of being associated with drug overdose deaths, notes Harvard Medical School. Because of such factors, "several states have taken the step of listing gabapentin as a schedule V controlled substance," says Lombardi. 
Its abuse can occur by taking a prescribed version of the drug differently than is directed, and, like other illicit substances, "can also be purchased without a prescription on the dark web," says Geyer.
She says that for most people, gabapentin is a safe drug to take, "however, its potential for abuse is increasingly being recognized." She says it's impossible to predict who may be susceptible to abuse the drug, but a history of addiction to other drugs may be a risk factor. "Patients should be counseled on this potential side effect when starting the medication," she cautions, "and be encouraged to speak up if they have concerns."

Gathered for an emergency meeting, the Johnson & Johnson drug safety team painted an alarming scene: People taking the company’s new blockbuster diabetes drug were falling gravely ill.
The drug, Invokana, had been on the market less than a year, and sales were already rocketing toward $1 billion. Now, in a small conference room on J&J’s campus here, senior executives listened as the safety experts described a potential threat to the drug’s success. In separate and strikingly similar reports sent to the company and reviewed by Reuters, doctors from across the United States told of 18 patients sickened by a rare and potentially fatal buildup of acid in the blood, known as diabetic ketoacidosis, or DKA, within days or weeks of starting Invokana.
Dr Bruce Leslie, who led the safety team at the March 2014 meeting, recommended that the company alert U.S. and European regulators. “I think we should get out in front of this,” Leslie told executives in the room, as he recounted in an interview with Reuters. “Otherwise, it could come back and bite us in the ass.”
The executives weren’t persuaded. They decided to take no action.
By July 1 that year, J&J had learned of 39 cases of ketoacidosis, according to company documents reviewed by Reuters. Still the company kept mum.
It wasn’t until May 2015 – two years and four million prescriptions after Invokana hit the market – that the public first heard of the drug’s association with ketoacidosis. That’s when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), learning of rising numbers of the dangerous episodes through its own reporting system, announced an investigation. It and European regulators subsequently ordered that a warning be added to the label on Invokana and more recent entrants to this new class of drugs, known as SGLT2 inhibitors.
The March 2014 meeting, reported here for the first time, was not an isolated incident. Based on interviews with several former J&J employees and a review of company documents related to Invokana’s development, rollout and safety from 2010 to 2014, Reuters found that in the five years prior to regulators’ intervention, J&J was repeatedly alerted to Invokana’s ketoacidosis risk and took no action.

Amgen (NASDAQ:AMGN) today announced TEPEZZA® (JAN: Teprotumumab (Genetical Recombination)) has been approved for the treatment of active or high clinical activity score (CAS) Thyroid Eye Disease (TED) by Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW).
TED is a serious, progressive and potentially vision-threatening rare autoimmune disease that can cause proptosis (eye bulging), diplopia (double vision), eye pain, redness and swelling. There are approximately 25,000 - 35,000 people living with TED in Japan, inclusive of both active and chronic (low CAS) TED. TEPEZZA is now the first and only medicine approved in Japan to treat active TED. A separate trial to study the efficacy of TEPEZZA in chronic TED patients in Japan is currently ongoing.
"This is the first approval for TEPEZZA in Asia and marks a significant milestone for the global treatment of TED," said Jay Bradner, M.D., executive vice president, Research and Development, and chief scientific officer at Amgen. "Historically, patients with TED have been managed with complex surgeries and high-dose steroids, which can cause further complications. With TEPEZZA, doctors have a nonsurgical and nonsteroidal option that treats a root cause of this debilitating disease."
TEPEZZA received orphan drug designation in Japan, which provided a nine-month regulatory review period compared to the standard 12-month review. The approval was based on the positive results of OPTIC-J (jRCT2031210453), a Phase 3 randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter study evaluating the efficacy, tolerability and safety of TEPEZZA in the treatment of patients with active TED in Japan.
The primary endpoint in the trial was met, as 89% of patients treated with TEPEZZA had a clinically meaningful improvement in proptosis (≥2 mm) compared with placebo (11%; p<0.0001) at week 24. The safety profile was consistent with the complete body of clinical data supporting TEPEZZA. A second Phase 3 clinical trial is ongoing in Japan evaluating TEPEZZA among adults with chronic TED and a low CAS (jRCT2031220730).
"People living with active TED can experience a significant burden of disease with symptoms that can make daily life difficult to navigate," said Yuji Hiromatsu, M.D., a professor emeritus at the Kurume University Medical Center and physician at the Diabetes, Thyroid and Endocrine Center at the Shin-Koga Hospital. "The approval of TEPEZZA in Japan is an important advancement for patients and offers a new treatment option that targets the underlying mechanism of the disease."
In addition to Japan, TEPEZZA is currently approved in the United States, Brazil and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and is under regulatory review in Europe, Canada and Australia.
TED is a serious, progressive, debilitating and potentially vision-threatening rare autoimmune disease. It often occurs in people living with Graves' disease, but is a distinct disease that is caused by autoantibodies activating an insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R)-mediated signaling complex on cells within the retro-orbital space. This leads to a cascade of negative effects, which may cause long-term, irreversible damage, including blindness. Signs and symptoms of TED may include dry eyes and grittiness; redness, swelling and excessive tearing; eyelid retraction; proptosis; pressure and/or pain behind the eyes; and diplopia.
Infusion Reactions: TEPEZZA may cause infusion reactions. Infusion reactions have been reported in approximately 4% of patients treated with TEPEZZA. Reported infusion reactions have usually been mild or moderate in severity. Signs and symptoms may include transient increases in blood pressure, feeling hot, tachycardia, dyspnea, headache, and muscular pain. Infusion reactions may occur during an infusion or within 1.5 hours after an infusion. In patients who experience an infusion reaction, consideration should be given to premedicating with an antihistamine, antipyretic, or corticosteroid and/or administering all subsequent infusions at a slower infusion rate.
Preexisting Inflammatory Bowel Disease: TEPEZZA may cause an exacerbation of preexisting inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Monitor patients with IBD for flare of disease. If IBD exacerbation is suspected, consider discontinuation of TEPEZZA.
Hyperglycemia: Increased blood glucose or hyperglycemia may occur in patients treated with TEPEZZA. In clinical trials, 10% of patients (two-thirds of whom had preexisting diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance) experienced hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemic events should be controlled with medications for glycemic control, if necessary. Assess patients for elevated blood glucose and symptoms of hyperglycemia prior to infusion and continue to monitor while on treatment with TEPEZZA. Ensure patients with hyperglycemia or preexisting diabetes are under appropriate glycemic control before and while receiving TEPEZZA.
Hearing Impairment Including Hearing Loss: TEPEZZA may cause severe hearing impairment including hearing loss, which in some cases may be permanent. Assess patients' hearing before, during, and after treatment with TEPEZZA and consider the benefit-risk of treatment with patients.
The most common adverse reactions (incidence ≥5% and greater than placebo) are muscle spasm, nausea, alopecia, diarrhea, fatigue, hyperglycemia, hearing impairment, dysgeusia, headache, dry skin, weight decreased, nail disorders, and menstrual disorders.

